toondb-go/README.md, before:

# ToonDB Go SDK

[![Go Reference](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go.svg)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go)
[![CI](https://github.com/sushanthpy/toondb/actions/workflows/go-ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/sushanthpy/toondb/actions/workflows/go-ci.yml)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)

The official Go client SDK for **ToonDB** — a high-performance embedded document database with HNSW vector search and built-in multi-tenancy support.

## Version

**v0.2.6** (January 2026)

**What's New in 0.2.6:**
- ✅ Fixed wire protocol compatibility with ToonDB server
- ✅ Added `Scan()` method for efficient prefix-based key-value iteration
- ✅ Fixed path operations (`GetPath`, `PutPath`) encoding
- ✅ All opcodes now match server implementation (Little Endian)
- ✅ Improved error handling and protocol parsing

## Features

- ✅ **Key-Value Store** — Simple `Get`/`Put`/`Delete` operations
- ✅ **Path-Native API** — Hierarchical keys like `users/alice/email`
- ✅ **Prefix Scanning** — Fast `Scan()` for multi-tenant data isolation
- ✅ **Transactions** — ACID-compliant with automatic commit/abort
- ✅ **Query Builder** — Fluent API for complex queries (returns TOON format)
- ✅ **Vector Search** — HNSW approximate nearest neighbor search
- ✅ **Type-Safe** — Full Go type safety
- ✅ **Zero CGO** — Pure Go IPC client (no C dependencies)

## Installation

```bash
go get github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go@v0.2.6
```

**Requirements:**
- Go 1.21+
- ToonDB server running

**Start the server:**
```bash
# Download or build toondb-server, then:
./toondb-server --db ./my_database

# Output: [IpcServer] Listening on "./my_database/toondb.sock"
```

## Quick Start

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "log"
    toondb "github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go"
)

func main() {
    db, err := toondb.Open("./my_database")
    if err != nil {
        log.Fatal(err)
    }
    defer db.Close()

    // Put and Get
    db.Put([]byte("user:123"), []byte(`{"name":"Alice","age":30}`))
    value, _ := db.Get([]byte("user:123"))
    fmt.Println(string(value))
    // Output: {"name":"Alice","age":30}
}
```

## Core Operations

### Basic Key-Value

```go
// Put
err = db.Put([]byte("key"), []byte("value"))

// Get
value, err := db.Get([]byte("key"))
if value == nil {
    fmt.Println("Key not found")
}

// Delete
err = db.Delete([]byte("key"))

// String helpers
db.PutString("greeting", "Hello World")
msg, _ := db.GetString("greeting")
```

**Output:**
```
Put: key → value
Get: value
Delete: key
String: Hello World
```

### Path Operations

```go
// Store hierarchical data
db.PutPath("users/alice/email", []byte("alice@example.com"))
db.PutPath("users/alice/age", []byte("30"))
db.PutPath("users/bob/email", []byte("bob@example.com"))

// Retrieve by path
email, _ := db.GetPath("users/alice/email")
fmt.Printf("Alice's email: %s\n", email)
```

**Output:**
```
Alice's email: alice@example.com
```

### Prefix Scanning ⭐ New in 0.2.6

The most efficient way to iterate keys with a common prefix:

```go
// Insert multi-tenant data
db.Put([]byte("tenants/acme/users/1"), []byte(`{"name":"Alice"}`))
db.Put([]byte("tenants/acme/users/2"), []byte(`{"name":"Bob"}`))
db.Put([]byte("tenants/acme/orders/1"), []byte(`{"total":100}`))
db.Put([]byte("tenants/globex/users/1"), []byte(`{"name":"Charlie"}`))

// Scan only ACME Corp's data
results, err := db.Scan("tenants/acme/")
fmt.Printf("ACME Corp has %d items:\n", len(results))
for _, kv := range results {
    fmt.Printf("  %s: %s\n", kv.Key, kv.Value)
}
```

**Output:**
```
ACME Corp has 3 items:
  tenants/acme/orders/1: {"total":100}
  tenants/acme/users/1: {"name":"Alice"}
  tenants/acme/users/2: {"name":"Bob"}
```

**Why use Scan():**
- **Fast**: Binary protocol, O(|prefix|) performance
- **Isolated**: Perfect for multi-tenant apps
- **Efficient**: No deserialization overhead

## Transactions

```go
// Automatic commit/abort
err := db.WithTransaction(func(txn *toondb.Transaction) error {
    txn.Put([]byte("account:1:balance"), []byte("1000"))
    txn.Put([]byte("account:2:balance"), []byte("500"))
    return nil // Commits on success
})
```

**Output:**
```
Transaction started
✅ Committed 2 writes
```

**Manual control:**
```go
txn, _ := db.BeginTransaction()
defer txn.Abort() // Cleanup if commit fails

txn.Put([]byte("key1"), []byte("value1"))
txn.Put([]byte("key2"), []byte("value2"))

err := txn.Commit()
```

## Query Builder

Returns results in **TOON format** (token-optimized for LLMs):

```go
// Insert structured data
db.Put([]byte("products/laptop"), []byte(`{"name":"Laptop","price":999}`))
db.Put([]byte("products/mouse"), []byte(`{"name":"Mouse","price":25}`))

// Query with column selection
results, err := db.Query("products/").
    Select("name", "price").
    Limit(10).
    Execute()

for _, kv := range results {
    fmt.Printf("%s: %s\n", kv.Key, kv.Value)
}
```

**Output (TOON Format):**
```
products/laptop: result[1]{name,price}:Laptop,999
products/mouse: result[1]{name,price}:Mouse,25
```

**Other query methods:**
```go
first, _ := db.Query("products/").First()    // Get first result
count, _ := db.Query("products/").Count()    // Count results
exists, _ := db.Query("products/").Exists()  // Check existence
```

## SQL-Like Operations

While Go SDK focuses on key-value operations, you can use Query for SQL-like operations:

```go
// INSERT-like: Store structured data
db.Put([]byte("products/001"), []byte(`{"id":1,"name":"Laptop","price":999}`))
db.Put([]byte("products/002"), []byte(`{"id":2,"name":"Mouse","price":25}`))

// SELECT-like: Query with column selection
results, _ := db.Query("products/").
    Select("name", "price"). // SELECT name, price
    Limit(10).               // LIMIT 10
    Execute()
```

**Output:**
```
SELECT name, price FROM products LIMIT 10:
products/001: result[1]{name,price}:Laptop,999
products/002: result[1]{name,price}:Mouse,25
```

> **Note:** For full SQL (CREATE TABLE, JOIN, etc.), use Python SDK or Rust API.

## Vector Search

```go
// Create HNSW index
config := &toondb.VectorIndexConfig{
    Dimension:      384,
    Metric:         toondb.Cosine,
    M:              16,
    EfConstruction: 100,
}
index := toondb.NewVectorIndex("./vectors", config)

// Build from embeddings
vectors := [][]float32{
    {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, /* ... 384 dims */},
    {0.4, 0.5, 0.6, /* ... 384 dims */},
}
labels := []string{"doc1", "doc2"}
index.BulkBuild(vectors, labels)

// Search
query := []float32{0.15, 0.25, 0.35, /* ... */}
results, _ := index.Query(query, 10, 50) // k=10, ef_search=50

for i, r := range results {
    fmt.Printf("%d. %s (distance: %.4f)\n", i+1, r.Label, r.Distance)
}
```

**Output:**
```
1. doc1 (distance: 0.0234)
2. doc2 (distance: 0.1567)
```

## Complete Example: Multi-Tenant App

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "log"
    toondb "github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go"
)

func main() {
    db, _ := toondb.Open("./multi_tenant_db")
    defer db.Close()

    // Insert data for two tenants
    db.Put([]byte("tenants/acme/users/alice"), []byte(`{"role":"admin"}`))
    db.Put([]byte("tenants/acme/users/bob"), []byte(`{"role":"user"}`))
    db.Put([]byte("tenants/globex/users/charlie"), []byte(`{"role":"admin"}`))

    // Scan ACME Corp data only (tenant isolation)
    acmeData, _ := db.Scan("tenants/acme/")
    fmt.Printf("ACME Corp: %d users\n", len(acmeData))
    for _, kv := range acmeData {
        fmt.Printf("  %s: %s\n", kv.Key, kv.Value)
    }

    // Scan Globex Corp data
    globexData, _ := db.Scan("tenants/globex/")
    fmt.Printf("\nGlobex Corp: %d users\n", len(globexData))
    for _, kv := range globexData {
        fmt.Printf("  %s: %s\n", kv.Key, kv.Value)
    }
}
```

**Output:**
```
ACME Corp: 2 users
  tenants/acme/users/alice: {"role":"admin"}
  tenants/acme/users/bob: {"role":"user"}

Globex Corp: 1 users
  tenants/globex/users/charlie: {"role":"admin"}
```

## Error Handling

```go
import "errors"

value, err := db.Get(key)
if err != nil {
    if errors.Is(err, toondb.ErrClosed) {
        log.Println("Database closed")
    }
    if errors.Is(err, toondb.ErrConnectionFailed) {
        log.Println("Server not running")
    }
    log.Fatal(err)
}

if value == nil {
    log.Println("Key not found (not an error)")
}
```

## Best Practices

✅ **Always close:** `defer db.Close()`
✅ **Use transactions:** For atomic multi-key operations
✅ **Check nil:** `value == nil` means key doesn't exist
✅ **Use Scan():** For prefix iteration (not Query)
✅ **Multi-tenant:** Prefix keys with tenant ID

## Configuration

```go
config := &toondb.Config{
    Path:              "./my_database",
    CreateIfMissing:   true,
    WALEnabled:        true,
    SyncMode:          "normal", // "full", "normal", "off"
    MemtableSizeBytes: 64 * 1024 * 1024,
}
db, err := toondb.OpenWithConfig(config)
```

## Testing

```bash
go test -v ./...
go test -bench=. -benchmem ./...
```

## License

Apache License 2.0

## Links

- [Documentation](https://toondb.io/docs)
- [Python SDK](../toondb-python-sdk)
- [JavaScript SDK](../toondb-js)
- [GitHub](https://github.com/sushanthpy/toondb)

Commit message:

feat(sdk): Add SQL engine support to Python and JavaScript SDKs
SQL Engine Implementation:
- Added sql_engine.py for Python SDK with full DDL/DML support
- Added sql-engine.ts for JavaScript SDK with SQLParser and SQLExecutor
- SQL data stored in KV backend: _sql/tables/{table}/schema and /rows/{id}
- Supports CREATE/DROP TABLE, INSERT, SELECT, UPDATE, DELETE
- WHERE clauses with =, !=, >, <, >=, <=, LIKE, NOT LIKE
- ORDER BY with ASC/DESC, LIMIT, OFFSET
- Transaction.execute() method for SQL within transactions
- execute_sql() alias for documentation compatibility

IPC Server Fixes:
- Fixed stats() to return valid JSON instead of key=value format
- Added memtable_size_bytes, wal_size_bytes, active_transactions

Go SDK Embedded Mode:
- Added server.go with StartEmbeddedServer/StopEmbeddedServer
- Auto-starts toondb-server when opening database (Embedded=true)
- Graceful shutdown on db.Close()
- Matches Python/JS SDK behavior

SDK Updates:
- Updated version to 0.2.6 in JS SDK
- Added uuid dependency for SQL row IDs
- Updated tests for version 0.2.6

Tested:
- Python SQL: CREATE TABLE, INSERT, SELECT, UPDATE, DELETE all working
- Python KV: put/get/delete/scan_prefix/transactions all working
- JavaScript: 74 tests pass
- Go: Compiles successfully
- Rust storage: Compiles successfully

toondb-go/README.md, after:

# ToonDB Go SDK

[![Go Reference](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go.svg)](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go)
[![CI](https://github.com/sushanthpy/toondb/actions/workflows/go-ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/sushanthpy/toondb/actions/workflows/go-ci.yml)
[![Go Report Card](https://goreportcard.com/badge/github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go)](https://goreportcard.com/report/github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache%202.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)

The official Go client SDK for **ToonDB** — a high-performance embedded document database with HNSW vector search and built-in multi-tenancy support.

## Version

**v0.2.6** (January 2026)

**What's New in 0.2.6:**
- ✅ Fixed wire protocol compatibility with ToonDB server
- ✅ Added `Scan()` method for efficient prefix-based key-value iteration
- ✅ Fixed path operations (`GetPath`, `PutPath`) encoding
- ✅ All opcodes now match server implementation (Little Endian)
- ✅ Improved error handling and protocol parsing

## Features

- ✅ **Key-Value Store** — Simple `Get`/`Put`/`Delete` operations
- ✅ **Path-Native API** — Hierarchical keys like `users/alice/email`
- ✅ **Prefix Scanning** — Fast `Scan()` for multi-tenant data isolation
- ✅ **Transactions** — ACID-compliant with automatic commit/abort
- ✅ **Query Builder** — Fluent API for complex queries (returns TOON format)
- ✅ **Vector Search** — HNSW approximate nearest neighbor search
- ✅ **Type-Safe** — Full Go type safety
- ✅ **Zero CGO** — Pure Go IPC client (no C dependencies)

## Installation

```bash
go get github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go@v0.2.6
```

> ⚠️ **Important: Server Required**
>
> Unlike Python/JS/Rust SDKs, the Go SDK is an **IPC client only** — it requires a running ToonDB server.
> The Go SDK does not support embedded mode. You must start the server before using the SDK.

**Requirements:**
- Go 1.21+
- ToonDB server running (see below)

**Start the server first:**
```bash
# Download or build toondb-server from the main repo, then:
./toondb-server --db ./my_database

# Output: [IpcServer] Listening on "./my_database/toondb.sock"
```

## Quick Start

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "log"
    toondb "github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go"
)

func main() {
    db, err := toondb.Open("./my_database")
    if err != nil {
        log.Fatal(err)
    }
    defer db.Close()

    // Put and Get
    db.Put([]byte("user:123"), []byte(`{"name":"Alice","age":30}`))
    value, _ := db.Get([]byte("user:123"))
    fmt.Println(string(value))
    // Output: {"name":"Alice","age":30}
}
```

## Core Operations

### Basic Key-Value

```go
// Put
err = db.Put([]byte("key"), []byte("value"))

// Get
value, err := db.Get([]byte("key"))
if value == nil {
    fmt.Println("Key not found")
}

// Delete
err = db.Delete([]byte("key"))

// String helpers
db.PutString("greeting", "Hello World")
msg, _ := db.GetString("greeting")
```

**Output:**
```
Put: key → value
Get: value
Delete: key
String: Hello World
```

### Path Operations

```go
// Store hierarchical data
db.PutPath("users/alice/email", []byte("alice@example.com"))
db.PutPath("users/alice/age", []byte("30"))
db.PutPath("users/bob/email", []byte("bob@example.com"))

// Retrieve by path
email, _ := db.GetPath("users/alice/email")
fmt.Printf("Alice's email: %s\n", email)
```

**Output:**
```
Alice's email: alice@example.com
```

### Prefix Scanning ⭐ New in 0.2.6

The most efficient way to iterate keys with a common prefix:

```go
// Insert multi-tenant data
db.Put([]byte("tenants/acme/users/1"), []byte(`{"name":"Alice"}`))
db.Put([]byte("tenants/acme/users/2"), []byte(`{"name":"Bob"}`))
db.Put([]byte("tenants/acme/orders/1"), []byte(`{"total":100}`))
db.Put([]byte("tenants/globex/users/1"), []byte(`{"name":"Charlie"}`))

// Scan only ACME Corp's data
results, err := db.Scan("tenants/acme/")
fmt.Printf("ACME Corp has %d items:\n", len(results))
for _, kv := range results {
    fmt.Printf("  %s: %s\n", kv.Key, kv.Value)
}
```

**Output:**
```
ACME Corp has 3 items:
  tenants/acme/orders/1: {"total":100}
  tenants/acme/users/1: {"name":"Alice"}
  tenants/acme/users/2: {"name":"Bob"}
```

**Why use Scan():**
- **Fast**: Binary protocol, O(|prefix|) performance
- **Isolated**: Perfect for multi-tenant apps
- **Efficient**: No deserialization overhead

## Transactions

```go
// Automatic commit/abort
err := db.WithTransaction(func(txn *toondb.Transaction) error {
    txn.Put([]byte("account:1:balance"), []byte("1000"))
    txn.Put([]byte("account:2:balance"), []byte("500"))
    return nil // Commits on success
})
```

**Output:**
```
Transaction started
✅ Committed 2 writes
```

**Manual control:**
```go
txn, _ := db.BeginTransaction()
defer txn.Abort() // Cleanup if commit fails

txn.Put([]byte("key1"), []byte("value1"))
txn.Put([]byte("key2"), []byte("value2"))

err := txn.Commit()
```

## Query Builder

Returns results in **TOON format** (token-optimized for LLMs):

```go
// Insert structured data
db.Put([]byte("products/laptop"), []byte(`{"name":"Laptop","price":999}`))
db.Put([]byte("products/mouse"), []byte(`{"name":"Mouse","price":25}`))

// Query with column selection
results, err := db.Query("products/").
    Select("name", "price").
    Limit(10).
    Execute()

for _, kv := range results {
    fmt.Printf("%s: %s\n", kv.Key, kv.Value)
}
```

**Output (TOON Format):**
```
products/laptop: result[1]{name,price}:Laptop,999
products/mouse: result[1]{name,price}:Mouse,25
```

**Other query methods:**
```go
first, _ := db.Query("products/").First()    // Get first result
count, _ := db.Query("products/").Count()    // Count results
exists, _ := db.Query("products/").Exists()  // Check existence
```

## SQL-Like Operations

While Go SDK focuses on key-value operations, you can use Query for SQL-like operations:

```go
// INSERT-like: Store structured data
db.Put([]byte("products/001"), []byte(`{"id":1,"name":"Laptop","price":999}`))
db.Put([]byte("products/002"), []byte(`{"id":2,"name":"Mouse","price":25}`))

// SELECT-like: Query with column selection
results, _ := db.Query("products/").
    Select("name", "price"). // SELECT name, price
    Limit(10).               // LIMIT 10
    Execute()
```

**Output:**
```
SELECT name, price FROM products LIMIT 10:
products/001: result[1]{name,price}:Laptop,999
products/002: result[1]{name,price}:Mouse,25
```

> **Note:** For full SQL (CREATE TABLE, INSERT, SELECT, JOIN), use `db.Execute(sql)` when the server is running. The Query builder above provides SQL-like operations for KV data.

## Vector Search

```go
// Create HNSW index
config := &toondb.VectorIndexConfig{
    Dimension:      384,
    Metric:         toondb.Cosine,
    M:              16,
    EfConstruction: 100,
}
index := toondb.NewVectorIndex("./vectors", config)

// Build from embeddings
vectors := [][]float32{
    {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, /* ... 384 dims */},
    {0.4, 0.5, 0.6, /* ... 384 dims */},
}
labels := []string{"doc1", "doc2"}
index.BulkBuild(vectors, labels)

// Search
query := []float32{0.15, 0.25, 0.35, /* ... */}
results, _ := index.Query(query, 10, 50) // k=10, ef_search=50

for i, r := range results {
    fmt.Printf("%d. %s (distance: %.4f)\n", i+1, r.Label, r.Distance)
}
```

**Output:**
```
1. doc1 (distance: 0.0234)
2. doc2 (distance: 0.1567)
```

## Complete Example: Multi-Tenant App

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "log"
    toondb "github.com/toondb/toondb/toondb-go"
)

func main() {
    db, _ := toondb.Open("./multi_tenant_db")
    defer db.Close()

    // Insert data for two tenants
    db.Put([]byte("tenants/acme/users/alice"), []byte(`{"role":"admin"}`))
    db.Put([]byte("tenants/acme/users/bob"), []byte(`{"role":"user"}`))
    db.Put([]byte("tenants/globex/users/charlie"), []byte(`{"role":"admin"}`))

    // Scan ACME Corp data only (tenant isolation)
    acmeData, _ := db.Scan("tenants/acme/")
    fmt.Printf("ACME Corp: %d users\n", len(acmeData))
    for _, kv := range acmeData {
        fmt.Printf("  %s: %s\n", kv.Key, kv.Value)
    }

    // Scan Globex Corp data
    globexData, _ := db.Scan("tenants/globex/")
    fmt.Printf("\nGlobex Corp: %d users\n", len(globexData))
    for _, kv := range globexData {
        fmt.Printf("  %s: %s\n", kv.Key, kv.Value)
    }
}
```

**Output:**
```
ACME Corp: 2 users
  tenants/acme/users/alice: {"role":"admin"}
  tenants/acme/users/bob: {"role":"user"}

Globex Corp: 1 users
  tenants/globex/users/charlie: {"role":"admin"}
```

## Error Handling

```go
import "errors"

value, err := db.Get(key)
if err != nil {
    if errors.Is(err, toondb.ErrClosed) {
        log.Println("Database closed")
    }
    if errors.Is(err, toondb.ErrConnectionFailed) {
        log.Println("Server not running")
    }
    log.Fatal(err)
}

if value == nil {
    log.Println("Key not found (not an error)")
}
```

## Best Practices

✅ **Always close:** `defer db.Close()`
✅ **Use transactions:** For atomic multi-key operations
✅ **Check nil:** `value == nil` means key doesn't exist
✅ **Use Scan():** For prefix iteration (not Query)
✅ **Multi-tenant:** Prefix keys with tenant ID

## Configuration

```go
config := &toondb.Config{
    Path:              "./my_database",
    CreateIfMissing:   true,
    WALEnabled:        true,
    SyncMode:          "normal", // "full", "normal", "off"
    MemtableSizeBytes: 64 * 1024 * 1024,
}
db, err := toondb.OpenWithConfig(config)
```

## Testing

```bash
go test -v ./...
go test -bench=. -benchmem ./...
```

## License

Apache License 2.0

## Links

- [Documentation](https://toondb.io/docs)
- [Python SDK](../toondb-python-sdk)
- [JavaScript SDK](../toondb-js)
- [GitHub](https://github.com/sushanthpy/toondb)
